---
layout: post
title: "OISS Chatbot"
---

## Table of contents
- [Motivation](#a-little-context-if-you-care-to-listen)
- [About the project](#about-the-project)
- [tl;dr](#tldr)

## A little context if you care to listen

This project combines the power of natural language processing, vector search, and retrieval-augmented generation to create a user-friendly interface that provides personalized responses to users' questions. I know, nothing new at this point, but still pretty cool, huh?

I started working on this project to build a contextual chatbot that can help me find answers to immigration-related queries from the Northwestern OISS (Office of International Student and Scholar) website, mainly to dive into RAG concepts and test out this new LLM framework that everyone was going on about: Langchain (their codebase was pretty bad as of Jan 2024, but they have significantly improved it in the last three months). 

Eventually, while brainstorming new features and improvements I could make, I realized this could become something many people can use. As immigrants in the US, my friends and I often have questions about our visa validity, flexibility, limitations, etc. More often than not, it takes countless hours of scrolling through the web, including but not limited to blogs, legal forums, university websites, etc., to get a couple-line answer to our query. So, I thought, why not just create a better system that looks up information from the very sources we often go to and curates answers to our complex queries? For this reason, I am taking a pause and trying to shape this project into a product that can help others. 

## About the project

The codebase we'll explore is a Streamlit application that achieves this functionality by leveraging the LangChain library, Qdrant vector store, and various chat models (GPT-3.5, Claude, Gemini, and Command-R).

### Project Overview

The key components of this project are:

1. **Data Ingestion and Indexing**: The codebase first ingests the content from the OISS website and creates a vector store using the Qdrant vector database. This allows for efficient retrieval of relevant information based on user queries.
2. **Chat Interface**: The application provides a Streamlit-based chat interface where users can enter their questions, and the chatbot responds with relevant information from the OISS website.
3. **Retrieval-Augmented Generation**: The project utilizes a Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) approach, where the chatbot combines the retrieved information from the vector store with the capabilities of large language models to generate comprehensive and informative responses.
4. **API Key Management**: The application securely stores the user's API key for the selected chat model, allowing them to continue the conversation in future sessions.
5. **Prompt engineering:** The chatbot combines retrieved information with different prompts to fine-tune the responses generated by the LLM. ****I am still experimenting with this part, so you might not see any effects of prompt engineering on the deployed app.

### How it works

- The user enters a URL for their school’s OISS website (currently, only Northwestern University is supported) and selects one of the 4 chat models: (Claude, GPT-3.5, Command-R, Gemini). The app parses the URL recursively and extracts all the text content from the website.
- This entire text content is then split into chunks for efficient processing.
- These chunks are converted to embeddings using **bge-small-en-v1.5,** a smaller version of the bge-m3 model that achieves pretty high scores on the HuggingFace MTE board. These embeddings are then stored in the Qdrant vector database.
- When the user asks a question, the app compares it with the text chunks and identifies the most semantically similar ones.
- It takes these selected embedding chunks and passes them to the selected chat API to generate a response.
- This response is streamed to the user along with the retrieved context so you know what exactly the model is looking at to answer your questions.

### Future Improvements and Feedback

This project is still a work in progress, and I'm excited to continue developing it further. Some potential future improvements include:

- Expanding the coverage of the OISS website content to provide more comprehensive answers
- Integrating additional chat models and exploring their strengths and weaknesses
- Enhancing the user interface with more visual elements and interactive features
- Exploring ways to make the API key management more user-friendly

I welcome any feedback, ideas, or suggestions from the community. Feel free to email me or connect with me on LinkedIn. I'm always eager to learn and improve this project.

## tl;dr

In this blog post, we've explored a Streamlit-based application that leverages natural language processing and retrieval-augmented generation to create a contextual chatbot for OISS queries. By combining the power of vector search, large language models, and secure API key management, this project demonstrates how to build an engaging and informative tool for users seeking immigration-related information.

Give it a try here: [OISS Chatbot](https://www.masumpatel.com/oiss-chatbot)

I hope this post has been informative and has sparked your interest in exploring similar projects. Happy coding!
